{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f1\fmodern\fprq1\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1503;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\lang1033\i\f0\fs20 Microsoft Game Studios/Digital Anvil - 23rd October 2003.\i0\par
\par
Hello Folks!\par
\par
Welcome to the \b Extra Bonus Assets\b0  section of this product.  We've\par
brought together even more material as we approached our DVD shipping\par
deadline.  Here is a brief description.\par
\par
\i Note - plenty of the files have their original creation date - preserved all\par
these years!  Microsoft Word is required to read DOC files.  Various video\par
codecs are in use, including DivX and Indeo, and Windows Media - check the\par
Summary tab of each file's Properties if you can't play the file.\i0\par
\par
\i NOTE - these doc(s) are for your reading enjoyment only, and are\par
supplied "as is."\par
\i0\par
Regards,\par
\par
Martin Galway\par
Audio Lead, "Freelancer"\par
\par
Curtis Neal,\par
Video Editor/DVD Author\par
\par
- - - - -\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 1) Scripts\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
There were numerous versions of the single-player story for "Freelancer."  The\par
one that ships in the game was begun around March of 2001 and was tweaked until\par
the end of 2002.  Included here are the first and final drafts.\par
\tab I've called it the "shooting script" because it underwent a minor amount\par
of tweaking as we created the final product, but otherwise, it's pretty darn\par
close to what shipped.  It's definitely what we used going into production.\par
This large file merges all 13 mission scripts with the planetside/base-side\par
story script (that was written & recorded first to allow production to begin on\par
the real-time cinematics).\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 2) Intro Storyboards\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
Hollywood storyboard artist Marc Baird was brought in by Chris Roberts to 'board the\par
extravagant intro sequence, in 1998/1999.  Here are some of his storyboards.  After\par
watching the intro in its full glory on this DVD, you'll be able to understand the\par
storyboards better.\par
\par
The intro was created by Digital Anvil's visual effects team (after finishing the\par
Wing Commander movie) during 1999, and the 5.1 soundtrack was created by Soundelux\par
DMG in Hollywood, in February 2000.\par
\par
The anonymous narrator role, who in this DVD product is revealed as the character\par
of "Atticus Rockford", was performed by actor Xander Berkeley - who ALSO performs the\par
roles of Sam Lonnigan and Dexter Hovis later in the game (a pretty varied set of\par
performances there!).\par
\par
\f2 You can browse through the images and get some idea of the original thoughts behind\par
each shot.  OR use the Windows Media 9 file Curtis Neal created, to allow you to get\par
through them all in about two minutes.  Some of the storyboards may relate to\par
discarded ideas, so take them as they are.\f0\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 3) Early music examples\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
I've included the earliest music we put into the game - from the Chris Roberts era.\par
The early music had an optimistic, "sea-going voyage" orchestral type of feel.  We\par
replaced it with a more modern, more sinister pseudo-electronic score in 2002\par
once the final character of the game was more evident.  Note - the "spotting" of\par
the music was also different back then - for example, a 2-minute piece for all\par
Liberty cityscapes, versus what we have now, which is one 20-second piece for each\par
planetscape (in the case of Liberty, there are six).  The early music was composed\par
by Visual Music's Dean Grindsfelder (Liberty & Pirates), Cato (Rheinland) and Osamu\par
Kitajima (Kusari - Osamu's only music in the shipping game is the suite of\par
planetscape tunes in Kusari).\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 4 Extra music not on the CD\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
I've included the music for bars - mostly by Andrew Sega, but some by Tom Seufert of\par
Visual Music (which is the earliest music in the game that survived until the present\par
day).  Use \b Windows Media Player 6.4\b0  for perfect looping of these WAVs. (in your\par
\b Program Files\b0  folder)\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 5 Movie tests/examples\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
We've included AVIs rendered out over the years, from ads & placards used in the\par
cityscapes, to artists' impressions of what the game will look like (\b DREAD.AVI\b0 ,\b\par
hud_ideas.avi\b0 ) to news broadcast visuals, that play underneath newsreader dialogue\par
(example - if it's a news clip about a new way to transport "solar gas" - the file\par
\b s37 solar gas.avi\b0  would be used).  There are also concepts for heads-up displays\par
in the game, ways to get your ship repaired, ways to get YOU repaired, etc..  As\par
you probably know, not all ideas, including the news clips, were used in the final\par
game.  \par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 6) Freelancer Story Character Vignettes\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
Jorg Neumann and Adam Foshko thought it would be cool to pad out the story's\par
fictional characters in a way that is not included in the story itself - offline,\par
so to speak.  So they created short speeches for each one, where they describe\par
themselves.  I can tell you, the actors enjoyed reading these vignettes probably\par
the most out of all their dialogue!  The vignettes are not 100% serious - there's\par
a bit of between-the-lines humour in each one.\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 7) Intro Concept Art\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
We had concept artist Craig Mullens paint some magnificent pictures of events in\par
the intro story - colonists climbing into their sleeping pods, and the sleeper\par
ships before they launch.  These are pretty faithfully represented in the final\par
movie.\par
\par
\par
- - - - -\par
\par
\i Notes on the "fully Authored" DVD assets:\i0\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 1) the Original 7-minute pre-rendered intro\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
This was shown at the 2000 Computer Game Developer's Conference (along with\par
in-game footage, some of which ended up in the 2001 E3 trailer) to rapturous\par
applause.  The importance of the Nomads that is inferred from their role in this intro\par
caused concern for us, as it warrants an early introduction to Nomads in the\par
story.  The intro movie was completely rendered before the rest of Freelancer's\par
story had been put together.  Over time, we decided that introducing the Nomads later\par
in the game was a better idea, and so we "removed" them from the intro - which is why\par
we have an "Original" intro and a "Release" intro.\par
\tab Note - you can use the "audio" button on your DVD remote to change\par
soundtracks - We've separated out the music, sound-effects and dialogue for those\par
who want to hear them separately.  Assignments are as follows:\par
\tab\tab Audio Soundtrack 1 (default) = mix\par
\tab\tab Audio Soundtrack 2 = fx\par
\tab\tab Audio Soundtrack 3 = music\par
\tab\tab Audio Soundtrack 4 = dialogue\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 2) the Release version of the pre-rendered intro\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
This is the version that ships with the game - but it has the 5.1 soundmix applied,\par
and of course the picture is "DVD quality." (The Release version on the game CD\par
had a 2.0-channel sound mix and used the Windows Media 7 codec.)\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 3) the "restored RTC intro"\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
In early versions of the game, the intro sequences continued for a total of 11 minutes,\par
which we deemed too long to get players into the action; therefore we removed\par
this section from the game.  It was to have played in between the pre-rendered intro\par
and the Freeport Seven Disaster sequence.  Here it is, restored for your viewing\par
pleasure, now pre-rendered at NTSC resolution with 16x anti-aliasing.  Note - the\par
soundtrack is a temp track specially-created for this DVD - the sequence was cut from\par
the game before any final music and sound-effects were done.  This intro is of\par
particular interest to anyone wondering where that egg-shaped "artifact" came from.\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 4) trailers\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
These are the only trailers we produced for the game.  The 2001 trailer was created by\par
Digital Anvil's video editor Curtis Neal and Project Lead Phil Wattenbarger, and\par
features music by James Hannigan.  The 2002 trailer started life as an "unofficial,\par
underground trailer" by RTC editor Ray Barerra.  Phil Wattenbarger liked it so much\par
that it became the official trailer for E3 that year - after getting music from James\par
Hannigan and Mat Mitchell.  The "web trailer" was put together around the time of the\par
release of the game, by Curtis Neal.\par
\par
\par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-720\li720\cf1\b\f1\fs28 5) Concept Art\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\par
We included many sketches from 1997/1998/1999 and you can see that we had many ideas on\par
how and where to take the characters in the game.  Adam Medhurst was Freelancer's Art\par
Director back then.  The Nomads underwent the largest changes of all from concept to\par
release; they are not portrayed "walking around" in the released game, though we\par
considered the concept.\par
\par
- - - - -\par
\par
\i Notes on the Music CD:\i0\par
\par
\cf1\b\f1\fs28 Freelancer Music CD 10/22/2003 - Track information\tab\tab\tab\par
\cf0\b0\f0\fs20\par
Performed By James Hannigan, Tom Seufert, Dean Grinsfelder, Osamu Kitajima, Cato, and Tim Kelly.\tab\tab\tab\par
\tab\tab\tab\par
Digitally Edited And Mastered By Martin Galway\tab\tab\tab\par
\par
Track\tab length\tab composer\tab title/details\par
1\tab 04:04\tab Dean Grinsfelder, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Liberty\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\i0\par
\tab\tab\tab\par
2\tab 04:10\tab Dean Grinsfelder, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Bretonia\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
3\tab 04:10\tab Cato, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Rheinland\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
4\tab 06:02\tab Cato, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Kusari\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle, Tekagi's Arch*\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\i * bonus music, not in game - original concept was for this to surround\par
\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Tekagi's Base in Mission 09.  We ran out of time to implement it.\i0\par
\tab\tab\tab\par
5\tab 04:03\tab Tim Kelly, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Omega\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
6\tab 04:09\tab Tim Kelly, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Omicron\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
7\tab 04:25\tab Tom Seufert, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Sigma\b0\par
\i  \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
8\tab 04:06\tab Tim Kelly, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Tau\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
9\tab 04:12\tab Tom Seufert, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Space Suite - Independent Worlds\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Exploration, Danger, Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
10\tab 06:56\tab various, L.A.\tab\tab\tab\tab\b Planetscapes Suite\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab California Minor, Denver, Houston, Los Angeles, Manhattan, Pittsburgh,\par
\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab New London, Cambridge, Leeds, Hamburg, New Berlin, Stuttgart, Vogtland,\par
\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Honshu, Kyushu, New Tokyo, Cadiz, Crete, Malta, Kurile, Harris\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
11\tab 05:00\tab James Hannigan, London\tab\tab\tab\b Emotions #1\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Comedy, Anticipation, Foreboding, Challenge\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
12\tab 04:17\tab James Hannigan, London\tab\tab\tab\b Emotions #2\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab wonderment, encouragement, psychosis, corruption, revealing\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
13\tab 03:22\tab James Hannigan, London\tab\tab\tab\b Emotions #3\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab solemnity, danger, exposition, mystery, failure, death\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
14\tab 06:45\tab James Hannigan, London\tab\tab\tab\b Races+Battles\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Bretonian Race Against Dexter, Battling The Nomads\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
15\tab 02:54\tab James Hannigan, London\tab\tab\tab\b Finale\b0\par
\i\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Victory, Final Nomad Battle\par
\i0\tab\tab\tab\par
\par
}
 